README.md, before:

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**

- [vircpt](#vircpt)
- [About](#about)
- [Examples](#examples)
  - [Creating an checkpoint](#creating-an-checkpoint)
  - [List checkpoints](#list-checkpoints)
  - [Start NBD export for a specific checkpoint](#start-nbd-export-for-a-specific-checkpoint)
  - [Release an export](#release-an-export)
  - [Removing checkpoints](#removing-checkpoints)
- [Filesystem Consistency](#filesystem-consistency)
- [Use Cases](#use-cases)
  - [Creating full backups from existent checkpoints](#creating-full-backups-from-existent-checkpoints)
- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [TODO / Ideas](#todo--ideas)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

# vircpt

Libvirt checkpoint swiss army knife.

# About

`vircpt` can be used to manage libvirt virtual domain checkpoints, as in:

 * create checkpoints
 * delete checkpoints
 * list checkpoints
 * export checkpoints via NBD server backend

# Examples

## Creating an checkpoint

Create an checkpoint named "foo":

```
# vircpt -d vm1 create --name foo
INFO lib common - printVersion: Version: 0.1 Arguments: ./vircpt -d vm1 create --name foo
INFO root vircpt - main: Libvirt library version: [9000000]
INFO root disktype - Optical: Skipping attached [cdrom] device: [sdb].
INFO root disktype - Optical: Skipping attached [floppy] device: [fda].
WARNING fs fs - freeze: Guest agent is not responding: QEMU guest agent is not connected
INFO root vircpt - main: Finished successfully
```

## List checkpoints

In order to view existing checkpoints, use:

```
# vircpt -d vm1 list
INFO lib common - printVersion: Version: 0.1 Arguments: ./vircpt -d vm1 list
INFO root vircpt - main: Libvirt library version: [9000000]
INFO root disktype - Optical: Skipping attached [cdrom] device: [sdb].
INFO root disktype - Optical: Skipping attached [floppy] device: [fda].
INFO root vircpt - main: List of existing checkpoints:
INFO root checkpoint - show:  + foo
INFO root vircpt - main: Finished successfully
```

## Start NBD export for a specific checkpoint

To access the virtual machine checkpoint data, use the export
parameter:

```
# vircpt -d vm1 export --name foo
INFO lib common - printVersion: Version: 0.1 Arguments: ./vircpt -d vm1 export --name foo
INFO root vircpt - main: Libvirt library version: [9000000]
INFO root disktype - Optical: Skipping attached [cdrom] device: [sdb].
INFO root disktype - Optical: Skipping attached [floppy] device: [fda].
INFO root vircpt - main: Socket for exported checkpoint: [/var/tmp/vircpt.207990]
INFO root vircpt - main: -----------------------------------
INFO root vircpt - main: Useful commands:
INFO root vircpt - main: -----------------------------------
INFO root vircpt - main: [nbdinfo 'nbd+unix:///?socket=/var/tmp/vircpt.207990' --list]
INFO root vircpt - main: Disk: sda
INFO root vircpt - main:  [qemu-img create -F raw -b nbd+unix:///sda?socket=/var/tmp/vircpt.207990 -f qcow2 /tmp/image_sda.qcow2]
INFO root vircpt - main:  [qemu-nbd -c /dev/nbd0 /tmp/image_sda.qcow2]  && [virsh attach-disk tgtvm --source /dev/nbd0  --target vdX]
INFO root vircpt - main:  [qemu-nbd -c /dev/nbd0 'nbd+unix:///sda?socket=/var/tmp/vircpt.207990' -r] && [fdisk -l /dev/nbd0]
INFO root vircpt - main: -----------------------------------
INFO root vircpt - main: Finished successfully
```

The output will create some useful commands for operating on the created
NBD socket endpoint, such as:

 * Query info about exported devices using nbdinfo.
 * Create an overlay image with NBD socket backend (for direct boot)
 * Setup and NBD Device for the overlay image, which can then be attached
 to another virtual machine

nbdinfo example:

```
# nbdinfo 'nbd+unix:///?socket=/var/tmp/vircpt.207990' --list
protocol: newstyle-fixed without TLS, using structured packets
export="sda":
        export-size: 52428800 (50M)
        uri: nbd+unix:///sda?socket=/var/tmp/vircpt.207990
        contexts:
                base:allocation
                qemu:dirty-bitmap:backup-sda
        is_rotational: false
[..]
```

## Release an export

To release an export:

```
# vircpt  -d vm1 release
```

## Removing checkpoints

Remove checkpoints via:

```
# vircpt -d vm1 delete --name foo
```

# Filesystem Consistency

If reachable, `vircpt` will attempt to freeze the domains file systems
via Qemu agent.


# Use Cases
## Creating full backups from existent checkpoints

In combination with other tools `vircpt` can be used to create backups.

1) create a new checkpoint:

```
# vircpt -d vm4 create --name backupcheckpoint
```

2) export the checkpoint via NBD:

```
# vircpt -d vm4 export --name backupcheckpoint
[..]
INFO root vircpt - showcmd: Socket for exported checkpoint: [/var/tmp/vircpt.12780]
[..]
```

3) backup the first disk (sda) data via `nbdcopy`:

```
# nbdcopy 'nbd+unix:///sda?socket=/var/tmp/vircpt.12377' -p backup-sda.img
```


# Requirements

 * libvirt / qemu versions with checkpoint support
 * virtual machine must have qcow v3 versioned images with persistent bitmap
   support.

# TODO / Ideas

Add "hotadd" option which allows to attach the data from the NBD export
to other virtual machines, for:

 * backup operations
 * antivirus scan via clamav?

Commit message:

get disk size, add example

README.md, after:

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**

- [vircpt](#vircpt)
- [About](#about)
- [Examples](#examples)
  - [Creating an checkpoint](#creating-an-checkpoint)
  - [List checkpoints](#list-checkpoints)
  - [Start NBD export for a specific checkpoint](#start-nbd-export-for-a-specific-checkpoint)
  - [Release an export](#release-an-export)
  - [Removing checkpoints](#removing-checkpoints)
- [Filesystem Consistency](#filesystem-consistency)
- [Use Cases](#use-cases)
  - [Creating full backups from existent checkpoints](#creating-full-backups-from-existent-checkpoints)
- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [TODO / Ideas](#todo--ideas)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

# vircpt

Libvirt checkpoint swiss army knife.

# About

`vircpt` can be used to manage libvirt virtual domain checkpoints, as in:

 * create checkpoints
 * delete checkpoints
 * list checkpoints
 * export checkpoints via NBD server backend

# Examples

## Creating an checkpoint

Create an checkpoint named "foo":

```
# vircpt -d vm1 create --name foo
INFO lib common - printVersion: Version: 0.1 Arguments: ./vircpt -d vm1 create --name foo
INFO root vircpt - main: Libvirt library version: [9000000]
INFO root disktype - Optical: Skipping attached [cdrom] device: [sdb].
INFO root disktype - Optical: Skipping attached [floppy] device: [fda].
WARNING fs fs - freeze: Guest agent is not responding: QEMU guest agent is not connected
INFO root vircpt - main: Finished successfully
```

## List checkpoints

In order to view existing checkpoints, use:

```
# vircpt -d vm1 list
INFO lib common - printVersion: Version: 0.1 Arguments: ./vircpt -d vm1 list
INFO root vircpt - main: Libvirt library version: [9000000]
INFO root disktype - Optical: Skipping attached [cdrom] device: [sdb].
INFO root disktype - Optical: Skipping attached [floppy] device: [fda].
INFO root vircpt - main: List of existing checkpoints:
INFO root checkpoint - show:  + foo
INFO root vircpt - main: Finished successfully
```

## Start NBD export for a specific checkpoint

To access the virtual machine checkpoint data, use the export
parameter:

```
# vircpt -d vm1 export --name foo
INFO lib common - printVersion: Version: 0.1 Arguments: ./vircpt -d vm1 export --name foo
INFO root vircpt - main: Libvirt library version: [9000000]
INFO root disktype - Optical: Skipping attached [cdrom] device: [sdb].
INFO root disktype - Optical: Skipping attached [floppy] device: [fda].
INFO root vircpt - main: Socket for exported checkpoint: [/var/tmp/vircpt.207990]
INFO root vircpt - main: -----------------------------------
INFO root vircpt - main: Useful commands:
INFO root vircpt - main: -----------------------------------
INFO root vircpt - main: [nbdinfo 'nbd+unix:///?socket=/var/tmp/vircpt.207990' --list]
INFO root vircpt - main: Disk: sda
INFO root vircpt - main:  [qemu-img create -F raw -b nbd+unix:///sda?socket=/var/tmp/vircpt.207990 -f qcow2 /tmp/image_sda.qcow2]
INFO root vircpt - main:  [qemu-nbd -c /dev/nbd0 /tmp/image_sda.qcow2]  && [virsh attach-disk tgtvm --source /dev/nbd0  --target vdX]
INFO root vircpt - main:  [qemu-nbd -c /dev/nbd0 'nbd+unix:///sda?socket=/var/tmp/vircpt.207990' -r] && [fdisk -l /dev/nbd0]
INFO root vircpt - main: -----------------------------------
INFO root vircpt - main: Finished successfully
```

The output will create some useful commands for operating on the created
NBD socket endpoint, such as:

 * Query info about exported devices using nbdinfo.
 * Create an overlay image with NBD socket backend (for direct boot)
 * Setup and NBD Device for the overlay image, which can then be attached
 to another virtual machine

nbdinfo example:

```
# nbdinfo 'nbd+unix:///?socket=/var/tmp/vircpt.207990' --list
protocol: newstyle-fixed without TLS, using structured packets
export="sda":
        export-size: 52428800 (50M)
        uri: nbd+unix:///sda?socket=/var/tmp/vircpt.207990
        contexts:
                base:allocation
                qemu:dirty-bitmap:backup-sda
        is_rotational: false
[..]
```

## Release an export

To release an export:

```
# vircpt  -d vm1 release
```

## Removing checkpoints

Remove checkpoints via:

```
# vircpt -d vm1 delete --name foo
```

# Filesystem Consistency

If reachable, `vircpt` will attempt to freeze the domains file systems
via Qemu agent.


# Use Cases
## Creating full backups from existent checkpoints

In combination with other tools `vircpt` can be used to create backups.

1) create a new checkpoint:

```
# vircpt -d vm4 create --name backupcheckpoint
```

2) export the checkpoint via NBD:

```
# vircpt -d vm4 export --name backupcheckpoint
[..]
INFO root vircpt - showcmd: Socket for exported checkpoint: [/var/tmp/vircpt.12780]
[..]
```

3) backup the first disk (sda) data via `nbdcopy` into a full raw device:

```
# nbdcopy 'nbd+unix:///sda?socket=/var/tmp/vircpt.12377' -p backup-sda.img
```

As alternative, backup the first disk into an thin provisioned qcow2 image
(size of the image depends on your setup, see the export
command output for example):

```
# qemu-img create -f qcow2 backup-vdf.qcow2 2097152B && nbdcopy -p 'nbd+unix:///vdf?socket=/var/tmp/vircpt.15923' -- [ qemu-nbd -f qcow2 backup-vdf.qcow2 ]
```

# Requirements

 * libvirt / qemu versions with checkpoint support
 * virtual machine must have qcow v3 versioned images with persistent bitmap
   support.

# TODO / Ideas

Add "hotadd" option which allows to attach the data from the NBD export
to other virtual machines, for:

 * backup operations
 * antivirus scan via clamav?
